-----------------
Containers README
-----------------

Written by chaikney, no AI used. This document goes deeper than you care about the containerisation and deployment system used.

Project history and lessons learned
-----------------------------------

Development of the initial deployment solution took place in a subfolder (`infra`) and parallel to the feature work. This was an effective use of time and gave a good understanding of the options and tradeoffs for the deployment once feature-completion was reached. The drawback was a lack of connection between development parts. time had to be spent on correcting " works on my machine" type issues that could have been avoided if we had provided / defined development containers at the beginning.

Later, the docker-compose and Makefile files were moved to the top-level and the links updated accordingly. Changes were made to the developer's working containers to make them more secure and to ensure that they ran without making assumptions about their environment (e.g. addresses of services).

For the majority of development time I used podman, for reasons discussed below. In the final stages I switched to docker solely because it seems to be more reliably installed on the 42U machines. This was easy because of how I had structured the `Makefile` and the CLI-compatibility of `podman compose`

How to use this
---------------

As noted elsewhere, the majority of the dev work used `podman` and the project has attempted to be agnostic between that and `docker`. If you use the Makefile (I hope) you won't notice any difference beyond changing the `$(BASECMD)` variable to your preferred tool.

The Makefile has a set of targets that should be self-explanatory. They will allow you to build the containers and launch the app as well as managing storage and secrets. Some of the key ones are:

 - help
   Lists existing targets and their state of readiness.
 - check_host
   Simple checks that run before launch and halt if the build is certain to fail (e.g. there is no container builder available.)
 - check_env and check_keys
   Pre-launch check for the presence of a `.env` and 42 API file.
 - secrets
   Generate necessary secrets (e.g. database passwords) that are needed to run but should not be kept in the repository.
 - start / stop
   Set the cluster of services running, or shut them down.

Description of containers
-------------------------

* web
  This is a multi-stage build. The first stage builds the react / vite files. The second serves them using `nginx` with a self-signed certificate providing the HTTPS. those certificates are generated by the `Makefile` if not already present. `lets-encrypt` might be a nice upgrade, but I like this solution for its ability to set up (this part) without network dependencies.
* ruby / API
  After much experimentation, this settled on a "slim" debian-based version. The Alpine-based images proved to be too minimal and have too many compatibility challenges for effective use. Some of this could be because the appropriate / desired ruby version was not packaged for alpine, and some could arise from its use of the `musl` library. Despite my preference for the more elegant and minimal version, this made the change compelling and switching to a smaller image remained on the "nice to have" list.
* database server
  This is a standard postgresql image from DockerHub. It uses conventions (e.g. `POSTGRES_PASSWORD_FILE`) that enable secure and simple setup. The version is 15, chosen slightly arbitrarily as a still-supported, stable version. Once development began on that major version, there was no compelling reason to move to a later version, notwithstanding that the latest debian packages v17.

Description of interfaces
-------------------------

The containers share an internal network for communication. Only the web container is open to the wider network, exposing port 8443.

.. NOTE::
   8443 is the conventional HTTPS port used when 443 is not available (because that would require root privileges  we don't have on the campus machines), in the same way as 8080 is often used instead of port 80.

The ruby API server listens on port 3000 and is proxied by the `nginx` frontend. Postgresql listens on its standard port.

The frontend calls /api and /cable URLs that are caught and proxied in `nginx.conf`

Notes on technologies used
--------------------------

Container base
..............

For its small size, the container images were initially all based upon `Alpine Linux`. The core images from DockerHub are used as the base, and then built upon.

This approach was preferred for efficiency, educational, and safety reasons.

- Efficiency
  Starting from a small base and adding only the necessary parts makes for a significantly smaller and faster experience than using prepackaged images would.
- Educational
  Preformed images run the risk of being an inscrutable, opaque blob that the team can neither debug nor explain. By building the image up gradually, the files are more likely to be explicable during evaluation.
- Safety
  If there is nothing in the image that should not be there, then the surface area with potential for abuse is much smaller.

The version of Alpine used as the base is defined in the `.env` file and sourced by the `compose` file. This overrides the default values in the individual `Dockerfile` build instructions.

As of 2026-05-27 the current Alpine version is 3.23.4 and this means that the active versions of key packages will be as follows:

- NGINX: 1.30.2-r0
- PostgreSQL: 17.10-r0
  Stable v17 had been preferred because it the version packaged for Debian 13, allowing us to switch bases if we really needed to. Ultimately we chose to use a packaged image instead.
- Ruby: 4.0.5
  Note that this differs from the above as it is *not* the default Alpine package. The API is developed in Ruby 4, which is not, at time of writing, packaged for Alpine. The ruby container downloads and installs this from source using variables in the `.env` if present.

podman versus docker
....................

tl;dr: Docker runs a persistent daemon and runs with root privileges. These are two things I prefer to avoid, being both paranoid and resource-constrained. Ultimately, the switch to docker was made because it fits better on the 42U computers.

Note that if you change the `$(BASECMD)` variable in the `Makefile` from `podman` to `docker` it *should* work identically, but this has not been exhaustively tested.

The initial containers were developed and tested using the following **host** platform and software.

- Debian 13 (stable as of project)
  In general, the requirements are met by whatever that is installed from `apt` with no further repositories added. This should ensure that the versions used are both widely available and stable.
- podman 5.4.2
- podman-docker 5.4.2
- podman-compose 1.3.0
- GNU make 4.4.1

.. NOTE::
   The 42U computers have older versions of these; probably need to ensure compatibility with those.
   - podman 3.4.4 (ERROR: podman compose -f flag not recognised)
   - podman-compose: not present, could be installed with `pipx install podman compose`
   - podman-docker: not present
   - GNU Make 4.3

The main problem caused by the earlier version of `podman` on the lab machines is the absence of the built-in `podman compose` interpreter. This implies you have to either install `podman-compose` as noted, and *also* change the rules in the `Makefile` slightly to add the hyphen. Ultimately this was decided to be not worth it, because there were configuration-related problems (e.g. default cache location) that do not exist using docker.

A solution could have been to ignore the lab machines and instead run the pieces from a VM, but this would not help with the final "staff assessment" evaluation where the VM could not be provided. Also, more work in general.

.. WARNING::
   Note that when using podman the make targets for *start*, *stop*, etc. may fail if you have not activated  the systemd service socket for the user: `systemctl --user start podman.socket`.

The user socket behaves like the Docker daemon  *but* consumes no resources until the socket is pinged and the service activated, while also not requiring root privileges for the daemon on the host machine.

AI Disclosure
.............

As ever, no LLMs have been used to write the documentation here. No grammar checker either, only good old ispell.

None of the Dockerfiles or similar content were LLM-generated. They may contain lines copied from "chats" with LLM systems with responses to queries about syntax. Nothing was added before I understood its purpose, and the files contain links to key parts of online documents where they are relevant. This should aid understanding and improvement of the containers.
